Chapter Sketch
The chapter ‘Glimpses of India’ consists of three parts

A Baker from Goa by Lucio Rodrigues
Coorg by Lokesh Abrol
Tea from Assam by Arup Kumar Datta
The first part is a pen-portrait of a traditional Goan village baker or pader who still has an important place in Goan culture although the Portuguese have left India long the back.
The second part is a pen-portrait of Coorg, which is a coffee country, famous for its rain forests and spices.
The third part is about the tea plantations in Assam.

About the Characters
Part III Tea from Assam
Rajvir
He is a youngster from Delhi. He is a person who is always excited to learn about new things.
Pranjoi
He is a friend and classmate of Rajvir. He belongs to Assam.

PART I A BAKER FROM GOA

Bread Making in Goa
This is a pen portrait of the traditional Goan village baker, who is still remembered by Goans. Bread making started from the Portuguese days. They were the lovers of bread. Bread making was an art which needed perfection. Mixing, moulding and baking were the areas of specialisation of making a bread. The loaves were baked in time tested furnaces. This profession has been continued by the baker’s descendants.

The Author’s Childhood Days Recalled
The writer remembers his childhood days when the baker used to be their friend, companion and guide. He used to visit twice a day, once in the morning during his selling hours and then again while returning after selling all his bread. The jingling thud of the bamboo he carried woke them up in the morning and they ran to meet and greet him. They ran for getting the bread bangles, which were a specially made sweet bread.

Delivering the Loaves
As the baker came, he would call out the lady of the house and wish her ‘Good Morning’. The children would be pushed aside and the loaves would be delivered to the maid servant. The author recalls the aroma of loaves that filled the air. The children would not even brush their teeth and ate bangles made of bread with tea.

Importance of Bread in Traditional Ceremonies
The various kinds of bread were very important for all occasions. No marriage was complete until and unless the traditional bol was served. The lady of the house prepared sandwiches on the occasion of her daughter’s engagement and bolinhas would be prepared for Christmas and other festivals.

The Baker’s Dress
The baker was usually dressed in a kabai, a long frock reaching down to the knees or a shirt and a trousers which were shorter than full-length ones and longer than half pants. Even today if anyone dares to go out in the streets wearing half pants, he is referred to as a pader (means baker).

Bread Making – A Profitable Profession
The baker usually collected his bills at the end of the month. All the accounts were written on some wall in the premises with a pencil. It was a profitable profession during those days because Portuguese were lovers of fresh baked loaves. The baker, his family members and his servants looked prosperous and happy.

Chapter Highlights

The Portuguese in Goa were lovers of bread.
Those eaters of bread have now gone but its makers still exist.
During the childhood days of the narrator, a baker used to be their friend, companion and guide.
The baker came twice a day- once in the morning and again while returning home after finishing his selling.
The jingling thud of the baker’s bamboo woke up the sleeping children.
The loaves were delivered to the servants of the house.
The children would peep into the baker’s basket for the bread bangles.
The children would eat bread with hot tea.
The marriages were incomplete without the popular bol bread.
Bolinhas was a must during Christmas and all other festivals.
The bakers wore a particular knee length frock known as kabai.
Baking was a profitable profession. Bakers had a plump physique testifying to this.
The bakers collected their bills at the end of the month.