Chapter Sketch
The Chapter ‘Two Stories About Flying’ is a combination of two inspiring stories ‘His First Flight’ and The Black Aeroplane’.

About the Characters
Story I-His First Flight
Family of Seagulls 6 members in the family of seagulls
Young Seagull One who is unable to fly due to fear.

Story II-The Black Aeroplane
The Narrator A pilot who was flying his Dakota aeroplane over France back to England lost his way due to storm.
The Unknown Friend A pilot who was flying the black aeroplane helped the narrator to find the way in the storm.
The Woman The working woman in the control centre whom the narrator asked about the unknown friend of the black aeroplane.

STORY I His First Flight

Liam O’ Flaherty
This story is about a family of seagulls. There was a young child in the family who was unable to fly even after several tries. The story highlights the importance of family and friends in one’s life. It also gives the message that one needs to believe in self to overcome all the hurdles of own life.

The Seagull Family
The seagull family consists of six seagulls-mother, father, three sons and one daughter. All of them except the youngest son are expert in flying high. His parents have tried several times to teach him how to fly but he is scared to do that and does not want to try anymore. He relies on the food that his parents bring back from their flights.

Young Seagull’s Fear of Flyihg
The youngest son is afraid of flying as he thinks that if he flies, his wings would not support him and he would fall down in the sea below and drown. Even his parents have rebuked him. They even threatened him if he doesn’t fly, he would die of hunger but he does not try.

Parents Leave Young Seagull Alone
After so many failed attempts his parents leave him alone on the rock without food. They even taunt him for his cowardice. The young seagull looks at his brothers and sister enjoying swimming, diving in the sea water for fish to feed themselves, but no one comes near him to offer food.

Hunger and Heat Increase
As the time passes, the young seagull could not tolerate the hunger and the heat. He moves closer to the edge and pretends to fall asleep but nobody takes notice of him.His brothers and sister have already had hearty breakfast and father seems busy preening the feathers on his back. The mother looks at him and tries to tempt him with pieces of fish. Her begging and crying does not effect him.

Young Seagull Dives for Food
The young seagull was very hungry. He was surprised enough at his mothers’ ignorance of his pitiful condition. Thus, he dives for food. He begins to fall down with a scream as soon as he dives.

Flight Begins
The young seagull begins to fall in the sea. He is afraid of drawing, so he tries to spread his wings outwards and begins flying. He feels a little dizzy but all his fear vanished. He soars slowly, downwards and upwards. He could finally fly on his own.

Joy of Flight and Reunion of Family
The seagull becomes so happy and soars higher calling ‘ga, ga, gab It was really a joyous moment for the whole family; his brothers and sister alongwith his parents come near to encourage and cheer him. The young seagull successfully made his first flight.

Chapter Highlights

Seagull family of 6 members.
The young seagull afraid of flying.
Family has concern of his food and fear of flying.
Cajoling and provoking him by family.
Family leaves him alone at the rock.
He cries because of heat and hunger.
No one looks at him except the mother.
Temptation by mother for a piece of fish.
He pretends to sleep but nobody comes to him,
Everybody taunts him for his cowardice.
The young seagull dives to catch a fish to feed himself.
He tries to spread his wings outwards.
He begins to fly slowly downwards and upwards.
He is now no longer afraid of flying and falling down in the sea. He soars with a joyous scream.
Seagull family comes near to him and encourages him.
He has made his first flight successfully.