Chapter Sketch
This is a sensitive story of an 8 years old girl. It describes her first bus journey into the world outside her village. The outside world is fascinating and the bus ride a mysterious journey. She wants to experience this mysterious journey alone. She finds each minute information provided by her neighbours, regarding the bus journey and collected money for the bus fare. One day she goes on the bus ride alone and comes back with new experiences.

OVERVIEW OF THE CHAPTER
Valliammai and Her Pastime
Valliammai was a girl, who was known as Valli in short. She was eight years old. She wanted to know about new things. She had no one to play with her of her own age. So her favourite pastime was to stand in front of the door of her house. This always gave her new experiences. The bus that travelled from her street to the town fascinated her the most. Looking at the new passengers every time the bus passed gave an unending joy to Valli.

Valli Wants to Travel in The Bus
Everyday when Valli watched the bus she wanted to travel in the bus. This wish became stronger day by day until it became a desire. She used to stare at the people while they got up and down the bus. If one of her friends went on a bus ride and described her about the bus journey, she became jealous of her and would shout.

Valli Discovers Details About The Bus Journey
For many days and months Valli listened to the talks of her neighbours and people who went on the bus journey. She even asked them some questions since they were regular travellers. This way she was able to get even the minutes details about the bus journey. The fare was 30 paise for one way and the trip to the town took 45 minutes. She kept on planning and calculating the things for a long time.

Valli Takes The Bus
Valli took the bus on a spring afternoon. There were only six to seven passengers in the bus. The bus was new with soft and luxurious seats. The conductor was a jolly sort of a person and asked Valli to get seated in the front of the bus. He addressed Valli as ‘Madam’. She started looking outside the bus and was attracted by the outside view. She could see the canal, the palm trees, grassland, distant mountains and the blue sky. A cow running towards the bus made her laugh and clap. The cow was not moving aside despite continuous honking by the driver.

Valli Reaches the Town
The bus reached the town after some time. Valli was on seeing the bright shops and big crowd. She stayed in the bus while the other passengers got down. The conductor asked her to get down but she told him that she would go back in the same bus. She refused his offer of giving her a cold drink as a treat.

The Return Journey
Valli saw the same wonderful sights on the return journey. She wasn’t bored and greeted everything with the same excitement she’d felt the first time. Suddenly, she saw a young cow lying dead by the road side. It was the same cow that was running towards the bus when she was going to town. She was filled with sadness on seeing her. The bus moved on but the thoughts of the dead cow haunted Valli. She no longer looked outside the window. When the bus reached her village, she ran straight for home. Her mother did not get to know of her secret journey.

Chapter Highlights

The story is about an eight year old girl named Valliammai. She was very curious to know about things.
Her favourite pastime was to stand at the front doorway of her house and see what was happening in the street outside.
She would watch the bus that passed every hour from her village to the nearest town.
She developed a desire to ride the bus. This became her deepest desire.
Valli found out the details of the bus journey by listening carefully to the conversations between her neighbours and regular bus users.
She came to know that the town was just six miles from her village and the fare for the bus journey was thirty paise one way. The trip took 45 minutes.
Valli planned her visit to the town. She saved sixty paise for the fare. Finally, one day she took the one o’clock bus to the town.
Valli was very happy to have got into the bus.
On the way to the town, Valli saw a cow running right in front of the bus. She clapped as the cow kept on running towards the bus despite the continuous honking by the driver.
Valli did not get off the bus when it reached the town. She also declined the offer of a cold drink by the conductor.
On the return journey, she saw the same cow lying dead by the roadside. This unpleasant sight made her very sad.
The bus reached the village at three forty. She ran straight for her home after getting down the bus.Her mother did not come to know about her journey.