Chapter Sketch
The story recounts the hard life and extreme faith in God of a poor farmer (Lencho) who has lost his crop due to heavy rain and hailstones. It was the only source of income to fulfil his family’s desires. He firmly believes that God will help him in such a situation and would not let him and his family die due to hunger. He writes a letter to God to seek help. Some kind employees of the post office helped him. So, the story tells us to have faith in God and never lose hope in adverse situations.

About the Characters
Lencho A poor farmer who lives on the crest of a low hill with his family. He was a firm believer of God. He is innocent, hopeful, caring and responsible.
Postmaster A fat, amiable fellow who helped Lencho to retain his faith in God. He gave a part of his salary in the charity for Lencho on behalf of God.
Post Office Employees People who helped Lencho on postmaster’s call. They laughed at Lencho when they saw the letter but helped him in his need. Lencho called them a bunch of crooks.

OVERVIEW OF THE CHAPTER

Lencho’s Hope of Good Harvest
Lencho was a farmer who lived on the crest of a low hill with his family. His was the only house in the entire valley. His field was full of ripe corn and easily visible from the house. He was eagerly waiting for a good rain to have a good harvest so he could earn money for his family.

Turning of Lencho’s Hope into Despair
As Lencho hoped, it started raining at the time of supper which gave Lencho a ray of hope. He was extremely happy to see that. He compared the raindrops as silver coins which shows his joy.
But soon his joy turned into despair as the rain changed into hailstones which ruined the crops. The field had been covered with snow like a layer of white salt. Lencho was worried for his family.

Lencho’s Firm Belief in God
Though Lencho was a poor farmer and had lost all his crops, he had firm faith in God. He found in God his last hope and decided to write a letter to God for help. He asked God to send him a hundred pesos so that he can sow his field again and support his family until the new crops were harvested.
He also wrote that if God didn’t help him, his family would die with hunger.

The Postmaster’s Reaction to Lencho’s Letter
After reading Lencho’s letter to God, the postmaster laughed but soon realised that Lencho had firm faith in God and his belief should not be shaken. So, he decided to help Lencho with the help of his post office employees. He collected seventy pesos and handed the envelope to Lencho himself in which he also contributed a part of his salary.

Lencho Gets Angry at Receiving Less Money
Lencho became angry when he saw seventy pesos in the envelope as he demanded a hundred pesos. He did not believe that God could do so and send L n less money. So, he decided to write a letter again for the rest of money. This time he requested God not to send the rest of the money through the letter because he thought that the post office employees were ‘bunch of crooks’ who might have stolen his money.

Chapter Highlights

Lencho’s hope of good rain to have a good crops.
It rains but the rain soon changes into hailstones.
Lencho has firm faith in God.
Lencho writes a letter to God to help him.
Lencho asks God to send him hundred pesos.
Postmaster and other employees laugh at Lencho’s letter to God.
Postmaster decides to help Lencho in his problem.
Postmaster wants every employee to help in this noble deed.
Postmaster collects seventy pesos and gives the envelope to Lencho himself.
Lencho gets angry after getting seventy pesos amount as he had asked for hundred pesos.
Lencho calls the employees of post office a ‘bunch of crooks’ as he thinks that they have stolen the rest of amount.
Lencho again writes a letter to God to send him rest of the money.
Lencho has firm faith in the magnanimity of God; and God never betrays the trust of a believer.